{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\nouicompat\deflang1040{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;}}
{\*\generator Riched20 10.0.22000}\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\f0\fs40\lang16 Videogame Design & Programming\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\fs22 Lezione 1 - 13/09/2022\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qj Course Introduction. \par
Daniele Loiaccono will assist lanzi, expecially during the afternoon. We'll see how to work in groups of eight and come up with ideas. A ritual taken from one of most famous book of game design: The Art of Game Design by Jessie Shell: every morning, when he gets up, he says something like "I am a game designer". Not everybody did it all together. Some did it later. We'll do a karaoke in the afternoon, it seems. In 2019, a girl from design school said "Frozen would be a very good choice", and that was scary. Anyway, we need an icebreaker. Anyway, if other people are commit to do something, other people will follow you. We were all game designer at the beginning, when we were kids. We invented all kind of games. If we talk to board game designers they say that tipically children are the worst enemies. They think of a complex idea, than a child says "it would be better like this" and they are right. So, we just have to remember how we were game designers when we were kid. Also, don't think about who will play your game! Accept criticism, don't become defensive. The objective is: create a videogame. We can show it to friends, or show it to New Game Designer. We can also show it to the Svilupparty of Bologna. Is it possible in a semester? Well, there have been 13 editions of the course, 885 students and over 210 games completed. Many were also published on main stores. We'll have to prepare, for next tuesday, a document that tells the idea of the game in a very simple way. \line The course organization is managed by Pierluca Lanzi and Daniele. The books we read to work on the course are Introduction to Game Design, Prototyping and Development (and many more).\line We'll have just a few lectures. They are about game design. NExt time, we'll have in steraming from Sweden Celentani. He implemented snake for the nokia. Then we'll have Eugenio from Milan. Then Ambrosi Alessio, italian somewhere in the world. They'll tell us whatever they think it's important for us to know. The course project is structured in five deriverables: conceps, design document, prototype, beta and final. The design document is a tracking of the development. It will be complete at the end. We'll use an itch.io page to upload and play the games. The project will be very short, since we want to try the main concepts of the game. We use the time till december to try the core ideas of the game. Jan 7: beta submission. Also, there will be 20 gameplay minutes. Jan 9 - Feb 20: beta presentation weeks.\line EVERYTHING must be put in a git repository. It is mandatory. It helps to keep track of who is working with what. \line Grading: sum of five grades. 3 for the Game concept. 3 for completing course tasks and submitting the design document. 6 points for the Prororype through voting. 18 points for Beta Release through voting. 3 points assigned for the final release. How are voting results translated into grades? Idk. Anyway, some can decide to have their game evaluated by the teacher (a nostro rischio e pericolo). A word about cheating: last year, something very disturbing happened. It came from a designer. The game concept was: a shit is walking ot the street and needs to color it. It's my copyright, he said. The concept can be ugly, but if the majority votes it, it's ok. Anyway, this individual copy and pasted a page from wikipedia for its concept. Another student identified the game. Copying crative stuff is VERY BAD. Pratcical lectures are based on Unity 2021.3 LTS & Jetbeans Rider.\line Unimi and Polimi people can join Erasmus groups, but not the other way around. This is because of different time tables.\par
Lecture - guests - workshops (8:15, 10:00, 14:30). All playtest will be online. Teams will submit ececutables that will be available online together with a gameplay video that explains how to play.\line November 1 there is no lecture. Lecture on november 8 is "optional". We have a google group. There will be short tasks, like play some game. So far, only 4 people din't complete the course in 13 years. Then, one should attend the Online Game Design course. Before we move forward, an interesting thing to check out is that: "your first ten games will suck, so get them out of the way fast" -Jesse Schell. Making games/creative stuff requires a lot of exercise. We won't make a masterpiece. But that's ok. \line Next tuesday: we have submitted two ideas. They will be anonymous. It must be two pages. Then, all of them are collected. Then, we say the 15 games we prefer. We have two concepts: one is free, another is "experimental", no violence or sex. After two weeks, we see the most voted ones. \par
\par
Submitting Your Game Concepts\par
Concept 1: whatever. Concept 2: experimental gameplay, with no violence or sex. They have to be anonymous. One page max, one art on extra sheets.\line In the game concepts, we should express the core idea of the game. It should be simple and brief. The target is us. It has to be doable, and we ota a concept if we want to do it. \line The One Sheet design document is the one we have to write. It tries to give the spark to other people. Short and informatice. \par
\par
Davide Caio has arrived!\par
"Reduce yout probability to fail from 99.99999999% to 90%". He will destroy ourd dreams. The presentation is focused for people that want to make their game. But also for those that want to work in a company and not fail in making their first game.\line First part: working career. He attended the course in 2013/2014, where there was a Global Game Jam. He brought the concept of "the way of life". Then he worked on Pride Run, and now he's working ot The Perfect Pencil (metroidvenia). After the course, what to do? Go to the events, let people know you. There, you can do a lot of networking. If you listen others, you won't make mistakes. Then, start working on your professional projects. They are projects that you are sure you'll end, you'll publish. Study an engine until you know it perfectly, to the bone. Use social media to reach international community. Specialize on one thing about making games, about an engine, sorry. Concentrate on a single engine. If you want to do small projects, you have to study mainly unity. If you want to make AAA, study unreal and C++ (standard in high leve gaming industry). Also, be competitive: go to events and work on your projects. Projects that have been released are interesting for companies. This could be easy to understand but not to make it real.\line Some of his projects: CATcher, Catcher Password and TAP COIN. Then The Way Of Life, Pride Run and now The Perfect Pencil. \line Second Part: How to start with our own project?\line Step 1 - Find the concept. It should be original. We need to find a game that, in our opinion, has an unique characteristic. in The Perfect pencil, the focus is on the narrative. If we are newbie, do something that takes less than one year. No MMORPG, no fps, no Battle Royale. They are too expensive, multiplayer, and so on. When you have found something that is unique, we go to the market and find the competitors. They are our friends, because can provide us data useful for the business plan. Then, find the team. It's not so easy to find a team. Find people that are valuable. Another important, IMPORTANT thing: make deals immediately. Talk about percentages right away. A person can bring to the team time, experience, contacts and money. Third step: start the analysis. It is: study the market, the competitors and how the game should be played instead of other games. Choose carefully the platform on which the game will be played. Also, plan the work! we must understand the amount of time and skill needed. Start the prototype as soon as possible, and finish it in less than a month. It helps to understand if the concept works. The prototype is what we show to the investors to have big money. If we have spaghetti code in the prototype, nobody cares. When the production is started, anyway, things must be done well. After the prototype, we have the fifth step: plan the production. Pre-deveopment, development, which includes programming, graphics (models, animations...), game design, audio and music, writing and localization, porting and marketing. A publisher can make the port, if necessary. Then, identify which tasks the team can and can't do. If for example we don't know how to write shaders, but we need shading, we need an external collaborator. This person is not in the team, so it must be payed well. Than, understand the man-months needed, and multiply them by 3000 euros (a worker actually earns a bit more than 1000 euros because of taxes, but the company pays 3000 euros). In Italy we have high worker costs because of taxies. Swedland, Norway etc.. there are even higher taxes (but you are also paid more). Anyway, a cost plan is necessary to understand how much everything costs. Step six: the business plan. It's the most important part and divides who fails and those who have a chance to make it. Chance to make it means reach the break-even (minimum number of copies to get back the money spent during development). Now, we know how much it will cost. How do we find the money? We can do Business to Business, where we do a game for another company. Like, Coca Cola asks us to do a marketing game for them. This is a B2B project, and it is a safe way to make money. They can be used to make a Business to Customers game, which doesn't grand us that we will earn something. The B2C part can be sustained with the B2B. B2C projects are huge and complex, because a lot of people have to be convinced that your game is good. In B2B you just have to convince only one person. One can also do a crowdfunding campaign, but a very powerful marketing campaign is needed. \line All the mechanics of the game need to be chosen before the production (designer needed). Then, a revenue analysis is needed. We need to choose the platforms, studying the competitors in order to tcalculate sales projections. Find the break-even, that is the number of copies needed to sell for the investments to be covered. Make different projections with different price points. Plan also the post launch waaaaay before the actual launch. You'll work for another year to the game once it has been released. Bugfixes, DLC, etc..\line We have basically three markets to release the game: mobile, PC and console.\line Mobile: really hard. you have less visibility inside the store. If you spent millions in marketing, you will be visible and your app will go up (you need to be on the first page of the store).\line Steam: there are a lot of games released every day. More visibility than mobile, but still not enough. Marketing is the most difficult part, pay someone to do it for you.\line Console: the nintendo Switch is the best place for your indie projects. \par
caio@cybercoconut.com\par
Every mechanic or element should have 3 or 4 uses in the game. DO NO DEVELOP something that lasts for only 1 minute. Canada and Nord Europe also are well payed (according to him). Many of the speakers will come from Sweden.\line Completing the game (a playable game) is the most difficult part. "There is no space for an idea guy in the gaming industry". \par
\par
Afternoon lab\par
Idea Generation. Many people thougth that brainstorming is just thinking hard, but no. Some principles are: quantity over quality, defer judgement, no "buts" (just "ands"), go wild, get visual, combine ideas.\line Let's see some approaches: the first is Noun Verb Adjective. Nouns: objects. Verbs: actions. Adjective: . We wANT TO DECOSTRUCT A CONCEPT AND MAKE SOMETHING NEW OUT OF IT. Uops, i was capslock. Synthesise this could become the proposal of a game, or a mechanic. In a few sentences, we have to describe a game. \line The second is Gamestorming. Coming up with an idea is difficult. Coming up with excellent ideas is even more difficult. Something we might have a block. If we are looking for ideas, we can watch other games (expecially the bad ones). Or we can take other books. Pay attention to the emotional responses, like if you feel frustrated, exhilarated, confident. The process of development is not linear, and the goal may become fuzzy. After an Alpha of a game, we don't change the ideas: the game is there, just make it better. The game gets less fuzzy as the development progresses. The process of brainstorming (gamestorming) is set in three stages:\line -OPEN: set the stage, develop themes, ideas, information. Let's collect ideas.\line -EXAMINE: explore and experiment.\line -CLOSE: take conclusions, decisions and action.\line Everything that opens, must close. The idea of opening is that we must diverge. Just collect stuff. The exploration must be bounded in time. The closing is important. \line 10 rules for gamestorming:\line 1) open and then close.\line 2) fire starting.\line 3) artifacts.\line 4) node generation.\line 5) meaningful space.\line 6) \line 7) \line 8) \line 9) Selection.\line 10) Try something new.\par
\ul\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\ulnone\par
}
 